This “mill_macro_metadata” file was most recently updated on 2020-10-15 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River Macroinvertebrate Data for 2018-2019


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) <dates in format YYYY-MM>

2018-05 to 2019-10


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA
GPS coordinates given below



5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to 
Sasha Clapp and Lyric Williams in 2018
Amy Turgeon and Samikshya Dhami in 2019

The Horner Fund funded a Summer Undergradate Research Fellowship for 
Renee Halloran in 2018
Sasha Clapp in 2019

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials and supplies in 
addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2020.  Mill River macroinvertebrate data metadata for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.

3. Recommended citation for the data:

Pratt, MC.  2020.  Mill River macroinvertebrate data for 2018-2019.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: mill.macro.csv       
      Short description:        

Each row shows the data from one type of organism found from a site on the same day.  The data contains all the organisms found for the 
2018-2019 sampling for the upstream and downstream riffles in the Mill River.  The worms and midges were identified down to the lowest level 
possible with the keys available in the summer only. 

Data shown include the raw macroinvertebrate data (columns A - AE) with environmental data measured in the stream (columns AF - AW) as well as NOAA weather data (columns AX-AY) and USGS discharge and gage height data (columns AZ-BC)


--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 
<Include links or references to publications or other documentation containing experimental design or protocols used in data collection>

Methods: Investigators sampled several quadrats (usually 10) in each site on each date.  For each 50 cm x 50 cm quadrat

The depth of the water was measured to the nearest 0.5 cm, and the percent cover of organic debris (dead leaves and sticks and other debris), sandy sediment, 
and larger rocks was estimated within the quadrat.


Aquatic macroinvertebrates were sampled from riffle habitats (areas with a rocky bottom, shallow depth, rippled water surface, and relatively fast water flow) 
by kick-sampling using D-nets (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh).  Nets were placed downstream with the opening facing upstream.  
A quadrat was placed in front of the net, the area sampled was 0.5 m x 0.5m.  


Larger rocks were picked up and any organisms found on the rocks were picked off and placed in a tub of river water.
Once all larger rocks were cleaned off and placed outside of the quadrat, the substratum was disturbed by shuffling and kicking an investigator's boots on the 
bottom of the river for 30 seconds to 1 minute making sure that the D-net caught anything disturbed by the kicking. 
Any crayfish that were disturbed and escaped out of the quadrat during this process were noted.  The contents of the net were rinsed into the tub of water.  
This process was repeated 5-20 times per site, and all samples from a site were either joined into one composite sample (Fall 2018) or kept separate by microhabitat (Summer 2018, Fall & Summer 2019).  


In each location (upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond) we sampled 5 microhabitats.  We usually sampled 2 quadrats in each microhabitat for a total of 10 quadrats sampled in a location on a particular day.  

Water quality measures were not taken during all sampling days because of time or weather constraints.  The water quality data were more comprehensive for 2019 than 2018. More information on methods is given below for each variable.
  
After collecting in the field, samples were taken back to the lab and sorted into categories (mostly at the order or family level) and then preserved in 
70% ethyl alcohol.  Later, each organism was identified to the lowest level possible (down to genus for most things, species for some, and higher taxonomic 
levels for some difficult to identify organisms such as worms and midges in the fall sampling times).

Note that because of heavy rains in Fall 2018, sampling was very difficult.  Crayfish were harder to see and counts are likely to be off.  
Also, the 3rd downstream sample did not sample the sponge microhabitat (DSP) so there were only 8 quadrats taken for that sample.



2. Describe any quality-assurance procedures performed on the data:
Whenever possible, identifications were checked by Marney Pratt to ensure consistency.  Data files were checked by Marney Pratt for errors in entry.

3. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:

Investigators included:
MP - Marney Pratt
SC - Sasha Clapp
LW - Lyric Williams
RH - Renee Halloran
DL - Denise Lello
AT - Andrew Turgeon
SD - Samikshya Dhami
Smith College Bio 131 students




-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: mill.macro.csv
-----------------------------------------
1. Number of variables: 55


2. Number of cases/rows: 2735 cases + heading row 


3. Variable List
    A. Name: date
       Description: sampling date in mm/dd/yyyy format

    B. Name: year
       Description: sampling year

    C. Name: season
       Description: sampling season (Summer or Fall)

    D. Name: sampleTime
       Description: sampling time 
	Each sampling time is a combition of the season and year, for example Fall 2018 or Summer 2019

    E. Name: location
       Description: location in the river - Upstream or Downstream of Paradise Pond
	Coordinates estimated with Google Earth.
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	Upstream = This site is located in the Mill River upstream of the Paradise Pond impoundment.  The trail used to get to the river is 
	Just off of Federal St in Northampton, MA.  The coordinates for the center of the area of the river sampled that is 
	"downstream of the bend" (the bend is the bend in the river where there is a high retaining wall on one side and the water runs 
	fast and deep): 
		UR "downstream of the bend" 42degrees19'09"N  72degrees39'17"W  226m in elevation
		UR "upstream of the bend"   42degrees19'17"N  72degrees39'12"W  226m in elevation

	Downstream = This site is located just downstream of the Paradise Pond Dam and Lamont Bridge in the Mill River.  
	The center of the area of the river sampled in is around:  42degrees18'53"N  72degrees38'27"W  150m in elevation
	
	Both sites were fast flowing, relatively shallow, riffles with mostly rocky substrate mixed with more or less sand
	The upstream site is fairly sandy "downstream of the bend" but we tried to sample in the rockier areas
	
	  F. Name: habitat
       Description: the type of habitat - which is Riffle for all the samples in this dataset (but kept here to make it clear when comparing with other datasets)

    G. Name: sampleID
       Description: unique identification code for each sample.
	example: 01URSU18 - first two numbers are the sample number, the next two letters are for the site (UR = upstream riffle, DR = downstream riffle), 
	the next two letters are for the season (SU = summer, FA = Fall), and the last two numbers are for the year (18 = 2018, 19 = 2019)

    H. Name: labelColor
       Description: Color of the label tape used on the vials for this sample.  

    I. Name: microhabitat
       Description: microhabitat within the sampling area where samples were taken.  
	See the map of each habitat for locations. https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is 
	slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster 
	and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a 
	tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded 
	because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area 
	just downstream of USH that is sunnier        

    J. Name: quadrat
       Description: in cases where each quadrat sampled was kept separately, this column indicates which quadrat it was.  Samples from Fall 2018 did not keep quadrats separate and thus this value is blank for those observations.

    K. Name: vial
       Description: Code on the top of the vial(s) that have the sameple(s) of organisms in the row

    L. Name: accepted TaxonID
       Description: this is a unique identification code for each taxon based on codes from NEON: https://data.neonscience.org/data-api/endpoints/taxonomy/
       
    N. Name: taxonRank
       Description: the taxonomic rank the organism was identified to (species, genus, family, etc)
       
    N. Name: scientificName
       Description: Scientific name of the organism identified 

    O. Name: phylum
       Description: the phylum of the organisms' taxonomy

    P. Name: subphylum
       Description: the subphylum of the organisms' taxonomy

    Q. Name: class
       Description: the class of the organisms' taxonomy

    R. Name: order
       Description: the order of the organisms' taxonomy

    S. Name: family
       Description: the family of the organisms' taxonomy

    T. Name: subfamily
       Description: the subfamily of the organisms' taxonomy

    U. Name: tribe
       Description: the tribe of the organisms' taxonomy

    V. Name: genus
       Description: the genus of the organisms' taxonomy

    W. Name: species
       Description: the species epithet of the organisms' taxonomy

    X. Name: organism_aggr
       Description: the unique name for each organism aggregated for some organisms
	Some species are aggregated into a genus (especially a lot of the mayflies, stoneflies, and caddisflies), family (midges), or class (segmented worms)

    Y. Name: notes
       Description: any notes recorded when identifying organisms

    Z. Name: number
       Description: number of organisms of that type for that sample site on that day

    AA. Name: tolerance
       Description: tolerance for the organism of that type
	The tolerance is the tolerance to organic pollution used to calculate the Hilsenhof Biotic Index.  Most tolerance values used were
	taken from the following resources
	
	Stream Biomonitoring Unit Staff.  2012. Standard operating Procedure: Biological monitoring of surface waters in New York State.  
	New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Division of Water.  Albany, NY.
	
	Aquatic Bioassessment Laboratory. 2003. List of California macroinvertebrate taxa and standard taxonomic effort. California Department of Fish and Game. Rancho Cordova, CA.
	https://www.safit.org/Docs/CABW_std_taxonomic_effort.pdf

    AB. Name: FFG
       Description: Primary functional feeding group of that organism

	cf - filtering collector 	dominant food: filter feeders or suspension feeders that eat decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) 
	cg - gathering collector 	dominant food: gathers or deposit feeds on decomposing fine particular matter (FPOM) (includes surface film feeders)
	om - omnivore dominant food: eats a variety of things including plant, animal, and detritus	
	prc - piercer  dominant food: eats by piercing its prey.  
	prd - predator	dominant food: eats living animal tissue.  Often ingests whole or part of another animal
	scr - scraper	 dominant food: scrapes periphyton of surfaces (periphyton = algae and associated material attached to rocks and other substrata)
	sh - shredders 	dominant food: herbivore variety chew and mines live plant material, detritivore variety chews, bores, or gouges decomposing vascular plant tissue including wood (course particulate organic matter = CPOM)

    AC. Name: FFG2
       Description: Secondary functional feeding group of that organism (abbreviations as above for FFG)


    AD. Name: Habit
       Description: Primary habit (mode of existence for locomotion, attachment, or concealment) of that organism

	all	all (lives in all differeny modes of existence)
	bur	burrower (burrows into soft sediment)
	clg	clinger (clings to rocks or other surfaces or attaches a fixed constructed retreat to the surface)
	cli	climber (climb up the stems, leaves, or roots of plants or woody debris)
	sk	skater (skates on the surface film of water)
	spr	sprawler (live on surface of floating leaves or on the surface of soft sediments)
	sw	swimmer (swimmers, also includes divers, swims and dives through the water column, will cling to surfaces between swimming episodes)

    AE. Name: Habit2
       Description: Secondary habit (mode of existence, behavior) of that organism (abbreviations as above for Habit)
       
    AF. Name: time
       Description: time that a quadrat was sampled in HH:MM:SS Eastern Time    
       
    AG. Name: depth
       Description: Depth of the quadrat in centimeters. Measured to the nearest 0.5 cm
       
    AH. Name: per_sediment
       Description: The percentage of the surface area of the river bottom within the quadrat that was softer sediment (small gravel, sand or fine sediment)
       
       Because the samples were grouped together differently in different sample times, 
       this value was averaged among 
       -quadrats in the same microhabitat for Summer 2018 & Fall 2019
       -quadrate and microhbaitats in the same sampleID for Fall 2018
       -and not averaged for Summer 2019

    AI. Name: per_rock
       Description: The percent of the surface area of the river bottom within the quadrat that was rock (small and large rocks included)

       Because the samples were grouped together differently in different sample times, 
       this value was averaged among 
       -quadrats in the same microhabitat for Summer 2018 & Fall 2019
       -quadrate and microhbaitats in the same sampleID for Fall 2018
       -and not averaged for Summer 2019

    AJ. Name: per_organic
       Description: The percent of the surface area of the river bottom within the quadrat that was organic material (leaves, woody debris, etc

       Because the samples were grouped together differently in different sample times, 
       this value was averaged among 
       -quadrats in the same microhabitat for Summer 2018 & Fall 2019
       -quadrate and microhbaitats in the same sampleID for Fall 2018
       -and not averaged for Summer 2019
      
       
    AK. Name: sky
       Description: the state of the sky - cloudy, sunny, partly sunny, etc - during the sample


    AL. Name: startTime
       Description: time (in HH:MM:SS Eastern Time) when sampling began
       
       Sometimes this value is the start of all the sampling, and other times it is the start of sampling a particular quadrat.  We were not consistent in recording the time each quadrat was started.

    AM. Name: endTime
       Description: time (in HH:MM:SS Eastern Time) when sampling was finished
       
       Sometimes this value is the start of all the sampling, and other times it is the start of sampling a particular quadrat.  We were not consistent in recording the time each quadrat was ended.

    AN. Name: lat
    	Description: Latitude coordinate as measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/
	
	This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  No GPS coordinates were measured in 2018. In Fall 2019, values were averaged among quadrats in the same microhabitat.  In Summer 2019 values were not averaged.

    AO. Name: long
	    Description: Longitude coordinate as measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/
	
		This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  No GPS coordinates were measured in 2018. In Fall 2019, values were averaged among quadrats in the same microhabitat.  In Summer 2019 values were not averaged.

    AP. Name: alt
	    Description: Altitude in meters as measured by Vernier's LabQuest 2 (uses WGS84, accruacy: half of data points fall within a radius of 2m)
	https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/labq2/
	
		This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  No GPS coordinates were measured in 2018. In Fall 2019, values were averaged among quadrats in the same microhabitat.  In Summer 2019 values were not averaged.

    AQ. Name: pH
       Description: the pH 
	pH was measured using an Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester (accuracy: ±0.01 pH)
	which was calibrated ahead of time using buffers made using the Vernier pH capsule set
	Effort was made to wait until the meter stabilized on a reading before the pH was recorded

    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was only measured once for each sampleID
    -In Fall 2018, this value was averaged among microhabitats within each sampleID (generally, one measurement was taken within each microhabitat but some sampleIDs had no values taken)
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this value was averaged for 3 measurements taken within each microhabitat


    AR. Name: wTemp
       Description: Water temperature was measured in Celcius

	2018-2019 we used the Vernier Stainless Steel Temperature Probe (accuracy: ±0.2°C at 0°C, ±0.5°C at 100°C) . 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/tmp-bta/
	
  the reading was taken just below the surface (with the whole metal part of the sensor in the water) and was a 10 second average once the reading seemed to stabilize. 


        This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was only measured once for each sampleID
    -In Fall 2018, this value was averaged among microhabitats within each sampleID (generally, one measurement was taken within each microhabitat but some sampleIDs had no values taken)
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this value was averaged for 3 measurements taken within each microhabitat

    AS. Name: DO
       Description: Dissolved oxygen was measured in milligrams of oxygen per liter by the Vernier Optical Dissolved Oxygen Probe (accurate to ± 0.1 mg/L). 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/odo-bta/
	The reading taken just below the surface (with the probe all the way in the water at least up to the temperature sensor) and was a 10 second average. 
	The probe was calibrated using a zero oxygen solution of sodium sulfite and a 100% saturation value determined by placing the probe in the storage cap 
	with distilled water saturating the sponge (so the air was 100% saturated with water)
	Effort was made to make sure that the probe had settled on a reading before it was recorded (it can take a little while for the first reading or two to settle as the temperature 
	adjusts)
	
		    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was only measured once for each sampleID
    -In Fall 2018, this value was averaged among microhabitats within each sampleID (generally, one measurement was taken within each microhabitat but some sampleIDs had no values taken)
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this value was averaged for 3 measurements taken within each microhabitat

    AT. Name: light
       Description: The photosyntehtically active radiation was measured in photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD) which corresponds to the micromoles of photons per meter squared per second
	https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/par-bta.pdf
	The sensor was mounted on a PVC pipe with one section that was bent to be parallel to the bottom of the river.  The sensor faced upstream (with the cord facing downstream)
	and care was taken to not let our shaddows interfere with the sensor.
	The reading taken was a 10 second average. 
	PAR range 0 to 2000 umol m-2 s-1 (in full sun)
	Absolute accuracy ±5% (full scale)
	Repeatability ±1%
	Long-term drift Less than 2% per year
	Cosine response
		 45º ±2%
 		75º ±5%
	Spectral range 410–655 nm
	Resolution 1 umol m-2 s-1
	Operating environment –40 to 70˚ C
		0–100% relative humidity
	Sensor head and cable can be submerged in water to electronics box.
	Stored calibration values
		slope 500 umol m-2 s-1/ V
		intercept 0 
		
		
		    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Fall 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling

    AU. Name: flow
       Description: the velocity of the water in meters per second
	stream velocity was measured in meters per second by the Vernier Flow Rate Sensor (without any spacer on the bottom) (accurate to 0.04 m/s, resolution of 0.0012 m/s). https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/flo-bta.pdf
	Does not measure really low flows well, there were times when the water could be seen to be moving very slowly but the propeller did not spin at all.
	The stream velocity measurement was taken by facing the propeller upstream and taking a 10 second average 
	The flow rate sensor was zeroed before measurements began.

      		    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Fall 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling

    AV. Name: turb
       Description: Turbidity was measured in Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) by the Vernier Turbidity Sensor (accurate to ±2 NTU for readings under 25 NTU). https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/trb-bta.pdf
	Samples of water from each location were taken with a clean turbidity bottle (https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/trb-bot/)
	Calibration was done using Millipore filtered RO water and the 100 NTU calibration bottle that came with the sensor.  All bottles were tipped upside down three times before a measurement was taken or calibration was performed
	Bottles were wiped clean by a Kim Wipe before the bottle was placed in the sensor.
	
	
	    		    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Fall 2018, this value was measured once in each microhabitat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this value was taken 3 times in each microhabitat and averaged within microhabitats before merging with the macroinvertebrate data

    AW. Name: cond
       Description: Conductivity was measured in microsiemens per centimeter (µS/cm) by the Vernier Conductivity Probe (accurate to ±2% of full-scale). https://www.vernier.com/manuals/con-bta/
	The conductivity probe was calibrated with Millipore filtered RO water and conductivity standard solution (low) of 150 µ S/cm. Measurements were made in the low range setting.
	https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/con-lst/

	Low range: 0 to 200 µS/cm (0 to 100 mg/L TDS) 
	Mid range: 0 to 2000 µS/cm (0 to 1000 mg/L TDS)
	High range: 0 to 20,000 µS/cm (0 to 10,000 mg/L TDS)
	
	
		    		    This value was not measured in each quadrat in each sample.  
    -In Summer 2018, this was not measured during macroinvertebrate sampling
    -In Fall 2018, this value was measured once in each microhabitat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Summer 2019, this value was taken for each quadrat and was not averaged before merging with the macroinvertebrate data
    -In Fall 2019, this value was taken 3 times in each microhabitat and averaged within microhabitats before merging with the macroinvertebrate data

    AX. Name: mon.precip
       Description: This is the total precipitation in millimeters for the 30 days prior to sampling (includes the sample date)
       
       Daily precipitation values in mm were downloaded from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN) https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/land-based-station-data/land-based-datasets/global-historical-climatology-network-ghcn
      
      NOAA GHCN weather data were downloaded for station USC00190120 with the rnoaa package in R and the meteo_tidy_ghcnd() function          
      Chamberlain, S (2020). rnoaa: 'NOAA' weather data from R. R package version 1.2.0.     
          https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rnoaa)
          
      To calculate total precipitation, the daily precipitation values were summed for 30 days prior to and including the sampling date 

    AY. Name: mon.ADD
       Description: This is the aggregated degree days (ADD) for the 30 days prior to sampling (includes the sample date)
       
      Daily minimum (Tmin) and maximum (Tmax) temperatures in Celcius were downloaded from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN) https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/land-based-station-data/land-based-datasets/global-historical-climatology-network-ghcn
      
      NOAA GHCN weather data were downloaded for station USC00190120 with the rnoaa package in R and the meteo_tidy_ghcnd() function           
      Chamberlain, S (2020). rnoaa: 'NOAA' weather data from R. R package version 1.2.0.     
          https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rnoaa)
          
      To calculate ADD, the Tmin and Tmax were averaged to give an estimate of average daily temperature (Tavg).  Then the Tavg was summed for 30 days prior to and including the sampling date 


    AZ. Name: mean.discharge
       Description: This is the mean daily stream discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs) for the sampling date
       
        Instantaneous discharge (parameterCd = "00060") was downloaded for USGS site 01171500 
        (Mill River Northampton, MA) 
        with the dataRetrieval package in R using the readNWISdata() function:
        De Cicco, L.A., Hirsch, R.M., Lorenz, D., Watkins, W.D., (2018). dataRetrieval: R
        packages for discovering and retrieving water data available from Federal
        hydrologic web services. R package version 2.7.6. doi:10.5066/P9X4L3GE)
        
        The mean was calculated for each sample date from the instantaneous values

       
    BA. Name: median.discharge
       Description: This is the median daily stream discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs) for the sampling date
       
       
        Instantaneous discharge (parameterCd = "00060") was downloaded for USGS site 01171500 
        (Mill River Northampton, MA) 
        with the dataRetrieval package in R using the readNWISdata() function:
        De Cicco, L.A., Hirsch, R.M., Lorenz, D., Watkins, W.D., (2018). dataRetrieval: R
        packages for discovering and retrieving water data available from Federal
        hydrologic web services. R package version 2.7.6. doi:10.5066/P9X4L3GE)
        
        The median was calculated for each sample date from the instantaneous values
       
    BB. Name: mean.gh
       Description: This is the mean daily stream gage height in feet for each sampling date
       
        Instantaneous gage height (parameterCd = "00065") was downloaded for USGS site 01171500 
        (Mill River Northampton, MA) 
        with the dataRetrieval package in R using the readNWISdata() function:
        De Cicco, L.A., Hirsch, R.M., Lorenz, D., Watkins, W.D., (2018). dataRetrieval: R
        packages for discovering and retrieving water data available from Federal
        hydrologic web services. R package version 2.7.6. doi:10.5066/P9X4L3GE)
        
        The mean was calculated for each sample date from the instantaneous values
       
    BC. Name: median.gh
       Description: This is the median daily stream gage height in feet for each sampling date
       
        Instantaneous gage height (parameterCd = "00065") was downloaded for USGS site 01171500 
        (Mill River Northampton, MA) 
        with the dataRetrieval package in R using the readNWISdata() function:
        De Cicco, L.A., Hirsch, R.M., Lorenz, D., Watkins, W.D., (2018). dataRetrieval: R
        packages for discovering and retrieving water data available from Federal
        hydrologic web services. R package version 2.7.6. doi:10.5066/P9X4L3GE)
        
        The mean was calculated for each sample date from the instantaneous values
       

4. Missing data codes:
        Code/symbol     Definition
	NA        	Not Available
        
5. Specialized formats of other abbreviations used
dates are all given in month/day/year (mm/dd/yyyy) format


